[BASED ON #3] Getting started tutorials (#4)
ekxide/iceoryx2-book: source/getting-started/iox2-debugging.md

> # Command Line Tools And Debugging

Reviewer: @elfenpiff Could you rename this file `command-line-tools-and-debugging.md` - the name appears in the URL so it's good to be descriptive.

Now we already have quite a complex system. We have a ultra-sonic sensor
measuring the distance to obstacles, an emergency brake and auto pilot service
and a global config service.
If something does not work as expected we might want to see what is going on
inside the system, and check the healthyness of the nodes, the services.

When a sensor malfunctions we want to be able to see the communication data,

> and when we discovered a bug in our algorithm we want to record the data that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and if we discover a bug in our algorithm we want to record the data that
```

caused the malfunction and replay it, so that we are sure that the problem is
fixed.

> Luckily, iceoryx2 comes with some command line tooling to do all of this. It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Luckily, iceoryx2 comes with some command line tooling to achieve all of this. It
```

can be installed with

```sh
cargo install iceoryx2-cli
```

It follows the same grammar as `cargo` for instance does. The first argument
is the subcommand and every subcommand comes with its own help and grammar
again. To see what subcommands are available we can call

```sh
iox2 --list
```

## Discovery

Let's assume our system is running and we want to get an overview of all the

> nodes. A call to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nodes. Executing
```

```sh
iox2 node list
```

prints us a full list of all nodes currently active. With

```sh
iox2 node details 00000000067ab750000005550000dcf7
```

we see the full configuration of a node and its state - if it is dead or alive.
The long number is the node id, which was displayed in the `iox2 node list`
command.

Services can be discovered as well with

```sh
iox2 service list
```

## Debugging

### Data Introspection

Let's assume we encounter a bug where our robot Larry does not break despite

> an obstacle is directly in front of our ultra-sonic sensor. The first low-level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an obstacle being directly in front of our ultra-sonic sensor. The first low-level
```

> thing we can do, is to check if the service is sending data and what kind of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thing we can do is to check if the service is sending data and what kind of
```

data.

We can subscribe also to any kind of service via the command line and see the
payload hex-encoded.

```sh
iox2 service subscribe "distance_to_obstacle"
```

> If everything seems to be in order, the service may not send out the
> notifications to the emergency break. We can check this as well with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If everything seems to be in order, we can check whether the service is actually sending out the
notifications to the emergency break. We can check this as well with
```

```sh
iox2 service listen "distance_to_obstacle"
```

### Injecting Data

So everything seems to be send as it should be. Now it is time to check the
emergency brake process directly and send a notification to it directly. In our

> example, the event id `5` signaled that the obstacle was too close. Lets send it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example, the event id `5` signals that the obstacle was too close. Lets send it
```

sensor is publishing the following type:

````{tab-set-code}
```{code-block} rust
#[derive(Debug, ZeroCopySend)]
#[repr(C)]
pub struct Distance {
    pub distance_in_meters: f64,
    pub some_other_property: f32,
}
```

```{code-block} python
import ctypes

class TransmissionData(ctypes.Structure):
    _fields_ = [
        ("distance_in_meters", ctypes.c_double),
        ("some_other_property", ctypes.c_float),
    ]
```

```{code-block} c++
struct Distance {
    double distance_in_meters;
    float some_other_property;
};
```

```{code-block} c
struct Distance {
    double distance_in_meters;
    float some_other_property;
};
```
````

We send out the same message 10 times and provide the hex content.

```sh
iox2 service publish -d IOX2DUMP --type-name Distance --type-size 16 \
    --type-alignment 8 --type-variant FIXEDSIZE --repetitions 10 \
    --message "09 00 00 00 1b 00 00 00 ae 47 e1 7a 14 8d bc 40" \
    distance_to_obstacle
```

### Record And Replay

When we found out that we had a bug in our algorithm, we need now to write an
integration test, where we provide sensor input for the emergency brake and we

> test that the emergency brake really activates. In a normal desktop application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
test whether the emergency brake really activates. In a normal desktop application
```

> we would write first a unit test, fix the bug and then the out unit test passes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we would write first a unit test, fix the bug and then when the unit test passes
```

> and proofs that the bug was fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it proves that the bug was fixed.
```

In iceoryx2 we can record data that causes the bug, fix the bug and then replay
the pre-recorded data. If the bug no longer shows we have proven that the issue

> is fixed. We start recording the data into the file `record.dat` for the next 10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
has been fixed. We start recording the data into the file `record.dat` for the next 10
```

> seconds and at that time we place an obstacle in front of the ultra-sonic sensor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seconds and during that time we place an obstacle in front of the ultra-sonic sensor
```

so that the emergency brake should activate.

```sh
iox2 service record -t 10 -o record.dat "distance_to_obstacle"
```

We can take a look into the file `record.dat` it is by default human readable.

> The file starts with the service header that defines the header, user header

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file starts with the service header that describes the payload, user header
```

and payload type as well as the service name, messaging pattern and the iceoryx2
version.

```toml
service_name = "distance_to_obstacle"

[iceoryx2_version]
major = 0
minor = 6
patch = 1

[details]
file_format_version = 1
messaging_pattern = "PublishSubscribe"

[details.types.payload]
variant = "FixedSize"
type_name = "Distance"
size = 16
alignment = 8

[details.types.user_header]
variant = "FixedSize"
type_name = "()"
size = 0
alignment = 1

[details.types.system_header]
variant = "FixedSize"
type_name = "iceoryx2::service::header::publish_subscribe::Header"
size = 40
alignment = 8
```

After the header, the actual recording follows. The payload is encoded in

> hex-code and can also be modified later for debugging purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hex-code that can also be modified later for debugging purposes.
```

```
### Recorded Data Start ###
time:     925
sys head: c0 f3 00 00 76 0b 00 00 44 d1 f5 2d 00 00 00 00 c0 f3 00 00 76 0b 00 00 36 d4 03 2e 01 00 00 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
usr head:
payload:  21 00 00 00 63 00 00 00 0a d7 a3 70 fd 2b da 40

time:     1925
sys head: c0 f3 00 00 76 0b 00 00 44 d1 f5 2d 00 00 00 00 c0 f3 00 00 76 0b 00 00 36 d4 03 2e 01 00 00 00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
usr head:
payload:  22 00 00 00 66 00 00 00 ec 51 b8 1e 05 f7 da 40
```

When the bug is fixed we can replay our recorded `record.dat` file and see if
the system behaves as we expect it.

```sh
iox2 service replay -i record.dat
```

# Command Line Tools and Debugging

Our system has grown into something fairly complex: an ultrasonic sensor
measuring distances, an emergency brake, an autopilot service, and a global

> configuration service. When things go wrong, and they will, we need ways to peek

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration service. When things go wrong, and they will, having a way to peek
```

inside the system. Maybe a node misbehaves, maybe a service is down, or maybe
Larry stubbornly refuses to brake even when a wall is right in front of him.

For these cases, iceoryx2 provides command line tooling. With it, you can
inspect nodes and services, subscribe to data, inject test messages, and even
record and replay entire sessions.

> Install the tools with:

Reviewer: This is already covered earlier in the article.
